# `nano` text editor

## TLDR

### Keyboard Shortcuts

* undo: `Alt + u`
* save: `Ctrl + O` ("write out") (press `return` key to confirm file name)
* exit: `Ctrl + X` 
* search: `Ctrl + W`
* justify: `Ctrl + J`
* read: `Ctrl + R` (read contents of another file and insert where cursor is)

**copy and paste procedure**: 

* go to the line you want to copy
* press `Ctrl + K` to cut the line
* press `Ctrl + U` to paste the line back
* press `Ctrl + U` in a different place to finally paste the copy

`nano` does not use the `Shift` key in shortcuts—for example, `Ctrl+G` is **NOT** `Ctrl+Shift+G`.

[See cheatsheet here][link_1]


<!-- ≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈***≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈ -->
## Notes

* `nano`: opens the `nano` text editor
* `nano file.txt`: opens (or creates) a file with name "file" and extension ".txt" (can have any
  name and extension)
* `nano +4 file.txt`: opens `file.txt` with the cursor placed in line 4
* `nano +-1 file.txt`: opens `file.txt` with the cursor placed in the last line 

When giving a filename on the command line, the cursor can be put on a specific line by adding the
line number with a plus sign (`+`) before the filename, and even in a specific column by adding it
with a comma. (Negative numbers count from the end of the file or line.).

### Commands inside `nano`

Commands are given by using the Control key (`Ctrl`, shown as `^`) or the Meta key (`Alt` or `Cmd`,
shown as `M-`).

* A control-key sequence is entered by holding down the `Ctrl` key and pressing the desired key
* A meta-key sequence is entered by holding down the Meta key (normally the Alt key) and pressing
  the desired key

If for some reason on your system the combinations with `Ctrl` or Alt do not work, you can generate
them by using the `Esc` key. 

* A control-key sequence is generated by pressing the `Esc` key twice and then pressing the desired
  key
* A meta-key sequence by pressing the `Esc` key once and then pressing the desired key

## Toggles

[See documentation here][toggles]

`M-` is the Meta key (more typically `Alt` or `Esc`)

**Wrapping** 

* Long-Line Wrapping: `M-L`
    - i.e. the -b (--breaklonglines) command-line option.
* Soft Wrapping: `M-S`
    - i.e. the -S (--softwrap) command-line option.

**-**    

* Constant Cursor Position Display: `M-C`
    - i.e. the -c (--constantshow) command-line option
* Smart Home Key: `M-H`
    - i.e. the -A (--smarthome) command-line option.
* Auto Indent: `M-I`
    - i.e. the -i (--autoindent) command-line option.
* Cut From Cursor To End-of-Line: `M-K`
    - i.e. the -k (--cutfromcursor) command-line option.

**-**    

* Mouse Support: `M-M`
    - i.e. the -m (--mouse) command-line option.
* Line Numbers: `M-N`
    - i.e. the -l (--linenumbers) command-line option.
* Tabs To Spaces: `M-O`
    - i.e. the -E (--tabstospaces) command-line option.
* Whitespace Display: `M-P`
    - i.e. the displaying of whitespace (see Whitespace).

**-**    

* Expert: `M-X`
    - i.e. the -x (--nohelp) command-line option.
* Syntax Coloring: `M-Y`
    - i.e. syntax coloring, when your nanorc defines syntaxes (see Syntax Highlighting).
* Hidden Interface: `M-Z`
    - i.e. the -0 (--zero) command-line option, but without the -x (--nohelp) part. That is: it
      toggles just the title bar plus status bar (or the combined mini bar plus status bar), not
      the help lines. The latter are toggled with: `M-X.

### Nanorc Files

[Nanorc files][nanorc_theory] can be used to configure nano to your liking without using
command-line options. (But any command-line option overrides its nanorc setting, of course.)

A nanorc file can contain set and unset commands for various options 
(see [Settings][nanorc_settings]). It can also contain commands that define syntax highlighting
and commands that rebind keys. Each command should be on a separate line, and all commands should be
written in lowercase.

During startup nano normally reads two files: first the system-wide file, `/etc/nanorc` (the exact
path may be different on your system), and then the user-specific file, either `~/.nanorc` or
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nano/nanorc` or `.config/nano/nanorc`, whichever exists first. However, if `-f
file, --rcfile=file` is given, nano skips the above files and reads just the specified settings
file.

*Sample file `~/.nanorc`*

```

set fill 100
set breaklonglines
set linenumbers
set boldtext
set mouse
set regexp
set stateflags
set tabstospaces

```

[link_1]: https://nano-editor.org/dist/latest/cheatsheet.html
[toggles]: https://nano-editor.org/dist/latest/nano.html#Feature-Toggles
[nanorc_settings]: https://nano-editor.org/dist/latest/nano.html#Settings
[nanorc_theory]: https://nano-editor.org/dist/latest/nano.html#Nanorc-Files
